Certain family court hearings to take place in public in radical trial Family court hearings are to be held in public for the first time, in a radical trial being pursued by the leading family judge for England and Wales, the Guardian understands.Sir James Munby, the president of the family division of the high court, is to continue far-reaching reforms to bring more transparency to the system in 2017 by launching a trial in which some types of hearings would be held in public. It is expected appropriate orders will remain in place to protect the identities of the participants. A separate plan is being considered to allow the media access to documents from hearings that have previously been kept secret. Women who have suffered domestic violence and experienced the family courts broke the ban on discussing their cases to reeal to the Guardian how they believe the secrecy of the system allows them to be further abused by ex-partners. Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims, who campaigns to highlight abuse of process thin the family and civil courts, welcomed moves to increase the openness of the court system. “We would support the increase of transparency in the family courts,” she said. “We are seeing far too many victims of stalking and domestic violence being exposed to unnecessary risk and harm in these court proceedings.” But Munby’s changes are likely to be opposed by much of the legal profession working within the family division. Joanne Edwards, former chair of Resolution, the national family law association, and head of family law at Forsters, said: “There is pretty widespread, if not universal, opposition to the public hearing pilot which is being suggested and to the release of court documents to members of the press.“There is strong opposition to any further opening up of the court amongst the professions. For us it is about safeguarding the interests of children who, unlike in criminal proceedings, invariably become embroiled in family proceedings through no fault of their own. There is a real risk of jigsaw identification and once details of their private family life are out there, they can never be retrieved. The resulting harm to children can be profound.” Family courts, which deal with issues such as divorce, financial provision for children, contact with children, adoption and local authority intervention to protect children, were opened to the media in 2009, but hearings largely remain secret. Judges can limit media attendance, there are tight restrictions on what – if anything – can be reported, the media have no access to documents and can be ordered to leave the court on the decision of the judge or magistrate. Munby consulted closely with senior lawyers in Australia, where family courts have been held in open hearings for the last 30 years, before launching the reforms. He has said pursuing further transparency in family courts is a subject close to his heart. He issued guidance in January 2014 aimed at encouraging judges to publish their judgments on the judicial website Bailii in redacted and anonymised forms to protect the identities of children. But the guidance only applied to the top level of judges and in the vast majority of family cases heard by district judges and magistrates, judgments are not published. According to Ministry of Justice figures, 225,590 cases were completed in the family court in 2015, almost half of which were divorce cases. In the same year, judges published 469 judgments on Bailii.Prof Julie Doughty, lecturer in law at Cardiff University, who is being funded by Nuffield to research transparency in the family courts, said current measures did not go far enough. “The judicial guidance of 2014 hasn’t ended the perception and allegations of secrecy in the family courts,” she said. “I don’t think you get transparency through publishing judgments on Bailii. To get transparency you have to present it in a way people can understand and make sense of quickly. Bailii does not really help the system become more transparent at all.” In a consultation document issued to lawyers in 2014, called Transparency: the next steps, Munby acknowledged the profession’s “nervousness” about further moves to increase transparency. But he said there was a need for greater openness to improve public understanding of the court process and confidence in the court system. “The public has a legitimate interest in being able to read what is being done by the judges in its name,” he told lawyers.He is likely to announce progress in the new year on the two key reforms in the consultation document: a pilot of family hearings being held in public, and the release of documents to the media. The latter will include case summaries, skeleton arguments of the case, documents which are issued during fact-finding hearings – for example where allegations of domestic violence have been made – and experts’ reports, to allow the media to perform their watchdog role in society, he said.Munby has already canvassed initial views on the public hearings and if he gives the go-ahead for the trial, it will go out to further consultation with the profession.But responses to his consultation were almost universally hostile. The proposals were rejected by the Association of Lawyers for Children, which has 1,400 members, the Family Law Bar Association,Resolution, the national family lawyers’ association, and Family Justice Young People’s Board, a group of young people who have had direct experience of the family justice system.Cris McCurley, a family lawyer who specialises in representing black and minority ethnic women in cases involving extreme domestic violence, said holding hearings in open court could stop vulnerable women taking part in hearings. “Family courts hear intimate personal details and even with anonymity imposed I think the particulars of cases would be identifiable certainly within their communities,” she said. “My worry is it would stop women coming forward to seek help to protect their children.”Lucy Reed, a family law barrister, who runs the Transparency Project, which aims to increase understanding of the system, said opening up the courts further should be an issue for parliament to discuss.Blind date: ‘I wish it had been on a Friday: I’d have liked more cocktails’ Christmas music is inescapable this time of year, making it impossible to hold a neutral opinion about the genre. But what causes people to fall into one camp or the other? Here, two writers flesh out the very personal reasons that the same annual din makes one desolate and the other merry. I hate Christmas music in public. In New York, I can’t go to the deli to get a soda, drink a cup of coffee in a diner, buy a pack of condoms in a drugstore, hear a radio station in the dentist’s office or even walk down the street without being bombarded with a stream of insipid bromides and jingles about how happy I should be. My reasons for hating unsolicited Christmas music are pretty personal. The holiday has stopped being enjoyable since my dad, mom and stepmother all died in my twenties; indeed, the whole season has become unbearable since one of my sisters died halfway through my thirties. Already blue in my thoughts from Thanksgiving to New Year’s, Christmas music invades my melancholy and makes it worse, forcing me to think about happy Christmases past never to be repeated, and to feel like a failure as a single adult without children. I know I’m not alone in these thoughts, though. Who among us wants to hear reminders of the good time you’re supposed to be having at home, at work, in the store and on the radio, every incessant second? As a Christian, I usually celebrate the holiday in some form. I’ve sung in many gospel choir concerts and know most of the Christmas standards by heart. I’ve hosted many a party where I’ve donned a Santa hat and played Christmas songs all night long. But I can turn this music on or off. When I am walking down the street or want to buy a toothbrush, I don’t want to be forced repeatedly to pine for a reality, a family or a set of experiences which are not available to me — and which should not be foisted on anyone. What I resent most about Christmas music is that it’s used as a blatant tool of social control to make us long for families that may be broken or deceased, and to desire consumer goods we don’t want and can’t afford. It’s also theocratic, and its omnipresence in the commons disrespects people who aren’t Christians. It even robs Christians of the chance to appreciate Christmas music as something special, and of the chance to just be with the quiet of the season.The trick to liking Christmas music is finding the right Christmas music to like. Obvious, yes, but not so easy to do, given the amount of garbage there is to sift through. Starting around Halloween, that’s all that plays in continuous rotation at the mall, Starbucks, Bill O’Reilly’s dressing room, even the quick-change oil place down the street, for some reason. It’s inescapable. It’s no wonder people hate Christmas music. But just as the spirit of Christmas exists apart from the annual orgy of consumerism that overtakes us like a bloodlust, the spirit of Christmas music isn’t tobe found in yet another version of Winter Wonderland or the kind-of-rape-y Baby, It’s Cold Outside. There’s plenty to love about Christmas music that doesn’t involve hoary standards worn thinner than Grandpa’s holiday tie, though even standards done well have a certain charm: Emmylou Harris singing The First Noel is spellbinding no matter how many times I hear it, and Paul Westerberg’s ramshackle version of Away in a Manger is perfect in its half-assed glory. Apart from those, the Christmas songs I love fall into two categories. First, subversive novelty tunes that spoof the ridiculous parts of the holiday season: Monty Python’s Christmas in Heaven, or Nick Lowe’s Christmas at the Airport, or Big Freedia’s over-the-top new Christmas jam Make It Jingle, a paean to ostentatious gifts and lewd dance moves. Come to think of it, that one’s probably not satirical, but it’s fun in a way that Santa Baby hasn’t been since 1953.Then there are the poignant, heart-on-sleeve songs, because who doesn’t like to wallow a bitevery now and then? The Pogues’ Fairytale of New York, Jesse Malin’s Xmas and John Prine’s Christmas in Prison, to name a few, see past the tinsel and lights to the bittersweet side of the Christmas season. Tidings of joy are often undercut by darker themes: financial instability, hunger, more keenly missing absent loved ones. The sad-bastard songs remind me to be grateful for my own good fortune. Christmas music also reminds me of my mom, who died two days before Christmas in 2002. She loved the holiday season, and I can’t remember a year when Harris’ Light of the Stable album wasn’t playing while she baked cookies and we decorated the tree. Even in leaner years, she never let on to us kids, or let it dim her enthusiasm. And she would have loved that Nick Lowe song. Time is a boomerang, not an arrow. I was adopted by Pentecostals and stamped “Missionary”. Christmas was important in the missionary calendar. From the beginning of November, either we were preparing packages to send to the Foreign Field or we were preparing packages to deliver to those in Hot Places returning to the Home Front. It might have been because my parents had been in the second world war. It might have been because we lived in End Time, waiting for Armageddon. Whatever the reason, there was a drill to Christmas, from making the mincemeat for the mince pies to singing carols to, or rather at, the unsaved of Accrington. Still, Mrs Winterson loved Christmas. It was the one time of the year when she went out into the world looking as though the world was more than a vale of tears. She was an unhappy woman, and so this happy time in our house was precious. I am sure I love Christmas because she did. On 21 December every year, my mother went out in her hat and coat while my father and I strung up the paper chains, made by me, from the corners of the parlour cornice to the centre light fitting. Eventually my mother returned, in what seemed to be a hailstorm, though maybe that was her personal weather. She carried a goose, half-in, half-out of her shopping bag, its slack head hung sideways like a dream nobody can remember. She passed it to me – goose and dream – and I plucked the feathers into a bucket. We kept the feathers to restuff whatever needed restuffing, and we saved the thick goose fat drained from the bird for roasting potatoes through the winter. Apart from Mrs W, who had a thyroid problem, everyone we knew was as thin as a ferret. We needed goose fat.
